One kind of quick rule that I try, try to
keep in
mind when I'm doing data analysis is, is
the don't save any output.
Now this may seem a little strange,
because
you need some output eventually, and yes,
that's true.
You will need things like tables and
figures and summaries so, if
you're going to write a report or a paper
or something like that.
But it's good to not keep that until the
very end when you're
actually doing that kind of, kind of end
stage activity ,because output a,a
stray output file is just sitting in your
project directory if you don't
know where it came from or how you
produced it is not reproducible.
So,if it's not reproducible its almost not
worth saving at all because you'll
always be wondering how you got those
numbers or how you made that figure.
So rather than save a piece of output like
a table or a figure it's
better to save the data and the code that
generated that table or figure right,
so, that way you can always reproduce
whatever it
is you, that type of output that you need.
Of course, in a very large project,
there's going to
be a very long pipeline of analysis that
you do.
So,maybe starting with raw data and then
going to processed data and
then maybe processing the data even more
and then doing some analysis.
And so there may be a lot of intermediate
files that are generated in this process.
And that's fine.
It's usually fine to keep those around
because
it, it will make the analysis much more
efficient.
Then if you have to kind of
reproduce everything every single time.
But if you do keep intermediate files
around you have to make sure
that, it's critical that you make sure
that every every intermediate file is
documented.
Then you have code that generates that
intermediate file and that
the data set that goes into it is, is
clearly documented.
So So, it's it's usually better to not
save any
output because if you can save the code in
the data
instead but if you need to save things
like intermediate files, then make
sure you have the code and the data to go
along with them.
Uh,this one is a very specific issue, but
it's very
important because um,it can lead to very
non reproducible results.
So if you every generate random
numbers,um, almost all random number
generators will generate pseudo random
numbers based on a seed, something called
a seed.
The seed is usually a number or a set of
numbers that
kind of initialize the random number
generator and the the random number
generator
kind of goes in a sequence and generates
random numbers based on
the seed so for example in R you can use
the set.seed function.
And you just give it a single integer
which will you will kind of initialize the
random
number generator and then generate a
sequence of random
numbers, if you use, if you call set.seed
and
then generate numbers that sequence of
random
numbers will be always be exactly
reproduceable
as long as you kind of set the seed again
at a later time.
Ah,and so these are important for things
like simulations.
For things like markup chain Monte Carlo
analysis.
Anything that involves generating random
numbers ah,will need ah,to set the seed.
And so, you should always remember to do
this, because
otherwise you'll get, your numbers will
just not be reproducible.
And if you do an analysis, if you
publish an analysis that's using random
numbers that you
don't use the seed, it's basically
impossible to go
back and try to figure out what it was.
So think about this anytime you use random
numbers.
So finally I just want to mention that,
that,
that the, the entire process of data
analysis at,
and And kind of and, and kind of working
with data is, is usually a very long
pipeline.
And starting with kind of very raw data,
maybe you got it
off the web, or you got it from some
investigation or experiment.
All the way to kind of cleaning it, to
processing it,
to analyzing it, to kind of making the
summaries and figures.
And then Generating
the data.
I start generating the results.
It's a very long process and you should
think
about that entire pipeline as you're
working on it.
And to think about how, whether each piece
of it is reproducible.
So as you go down on this pipeline, you
know.
The, the thing about, the, how you get to
the end is
just as important as, you know, the final
product that you produce.
So the analysis of the report that you
produce at the
end There's going to be a small subset of
all the work
that you did to get there.
And, but the fact of the matter is that
all of the work that you got, that
you did to get there is, is, is just as
important to keep track of and document.
And as a general rule the more, the
more of the data analysis pipeline that
you can,
that you can make reproducible the better
it is
for you, the better it is for other
people.
And the more credible your results will
be.
So think about the entire pipeline It's
all important.
It's not
just the final product that's important.
So taking all these rules and summarizing
them I just, I put together a simple list
of, of, questions that you should ask
yourself
as you're doing any sort of DNA analysis.
So of course, number one, are we doing
some
good science, is this interesting, is this
worth even doing?
Was any part of this analysis done by
hand?
Now, this may be unavoidable.
You may have to do some things by hand.
So the only real issue here is that if
you do something by hand, is it precisely
documented?
and, and, and, and in particular, you need
to make sure
that if it is documented that
the documentation actually matches the
reality.
Because many times when you document
something, you write it down.
But then later on, you actually change
what it is that you
actually did, because you need to update
something, maybe there was a mistake.
So if you do update or change something
then you have
to change and update the corresponding
documentation that goes with it.
So does the documentation match the
reality of what you did?
Um,of course
you want to be able to teach a computer to
do as much as possible, so have you
coded as much as possible and have you
kind
of written down In a precise manner what
you did.
Cause any time you teach a computer to do
something, this is a good idea I think.
Are we using a version control system?
Are you using something like GID or sbm or
something like that?
Have you documented the software
enviroment so every,
tool, every library, your operating
system, your architecture,
these all have to be noted.
Have you saved any output that can not
be reconstructed from the original data in
code.
Right so and generally you want to avoid
saving any output that
can't be, can't be kind of derived from
some data in code.
So it's better to save the data in the
code rather than the output.
And then a final question might be, you
know,
how far back in the analysis pipeline can
we go.
Before the results are no longer
reproducible.
Now, if you're
all, if you're working on a piece of the
pipeline it may not
be possible to go all the way back, for
example, to the raw data.
You may only go back to some processed
version of that data.
And that's fine.
But just think about, you know, the entire
pipeline and
see how, and try to make it as
reproducible as possible.
So these are my, kind of general tips for.
Thinking about reproducibility in
a generic type of data analysis project.
I think a lot of these will help you get,
kind of, organize a project and make
sure that you're thinking along the right
things.
The key things are, you know, be careful
when you do things by hand,
try to code as much as possible
and to document everything as precisely as
possible.